add 'cost model' blogpost (#347)
nim-lang/website: jekyll/_posts/2022-11-10-a-cost-model-for-nim.md

---
title: "A cost model for Nim"

> author: Araq

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Andreas Rumpf (Araq)
```

these well you can also do everything else well! The algorithms used are
oblivious of the heap size, Nim's memory management works well with a
64 kB sized heap but also scales to a 16 gigabyte heap, for example.

Memory can be shared effectively between threads without copying in Nim
version 2. The complexity of allocation and deallocation is O(1) and
Nim's default allocator is completely lockfree. Fragmentation is low
(average is 15% - worst case is 25%) as it is based on the
[TLSF](http://www.gii.upv.es/tlsf/) algorithm. The lockfree ideas have
been taken from [mimalloc](https://github.com/microsoft/mimalloc).

That means that the cost of `new(x)` or `ObjectRef(fields)` is O(1) for
the allocation and O(`sizeof(x[])`) for the required initialization. If
the object constructor initializes every field *explicitly* the
*implicit* initialization step is optimized out.

The cost of destruction of a subgraph starting at the root `x` is O(N)
where N is the number of nodes in the subgraph. A subgraph of acyclic
data is immediately destroyed when the refcount of its root reaches 0.

Cyclic data is harder to reason about and best avoided. Nevertheless, if

> you end up having it the system remains "deterministic" and responsive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you end up creating cyclic data the system remains "deterministic" and responsive
```

proc GC_disableOrc*()
  ## Disables the cycle collector subsystem of `--mm:orc`.
```

The idea is that you can schedule a cycle collection when it is
"convenient" for your program. In other words when your program is
currently not busy. However, in my experiments with Nim's async event
loop I saw no benefits in doing so. The lesson to take away here is
**"relax, you'll be fine"**.

## Deterministic exception handling

### Subtype checking in O(1)

Starting with version 2 the `of` operator, which is also used implicitly
in the `except E as ex` construct, is finally as fast as it should be:
It's a range check followed by a memory fetch. The cost is O(1).

Nim's exceptions are based on a good old-fashioned type hierarchy that
supports run-time polymorphism. The different exception classes can vary
in size. As such, exceptions are allocated on the heap. However, it is
possible to preallocate them. The standard library does not do this yet
-- pull requests are welcome!

### Goto-based exception handling

When you compile to C code, exception handling is implemented by setting
an internal error flag that is queried after every function call that

> can raise. `setjmp` is not used anymore. To improve the precision of the
> compiler's abilities to reason about which call "can raise", make
> wise usage of the `.raises: []` annotation. The error path is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can raise. `setjmp` is not used anymore. To improve the
compiler's abilities to reason about which call "can raise", make
wise use of the `.raises: []` annotation. The error path is
```
